.TH RCHECKBOOK-IMPORT 1 "20 June 2026" "version 0.5.1"
.SH NAME
rcheckbook-import \- import transactions to registry.
.SH SYNOPSIS
rcheckbook import [path/to/database] 
--input-file <file path> | -i <file path>
.SH DESCRIPTION
Import transactions to registry.
.PP
The import subcommand can be used to import transactions 
to the registry from file
in the following formats:
.RS
.IP
JSON (bcheck)
.IP
QIF
.IP
Excel (xlsx)
.IP
ODS
.IP
TSV
.RE
.PP
The extension determines how the program will parse the file.
.PP
If no extension is provided, nothing will be imported.
.PP
Like the add command, 
if you do not provide a database path,
the program will attempt to open
.B register.db
from the
.B .checkbook
directory in your home folder.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -i <file path>, --input-file <file path>

The file to import.
.PP
As stated under the
.B DESCRIPTION
section, the file extension determines how the file is parsed.
.PP
If you import an ODS or excel file,
the first line is assumed to 
be a header row and it will be skipped over.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
By default, this program generates a database, 
.B when needed
, from schema file with a particular name located 
in a particular directory.
.PP
On Windows, it will look in the following places in order:
.RS
.IP
the executable's directory
.IP
the current directory
.RE
On macOS, Linux, 
and other Unix-like Operating Systems, it will
look in
.B /usr/local/share/rcheckbook
\.
.PP
If the operating system doesn't have these locations,
such as if you were running NixOS, 
or you cannot write to them, 
you can instead tell it look in a specific 
place by setting
.B REGISTRY_SCHEMA_DIR
\.
.PP
When this is set, 
the program will look for the schema file in that directory
before looking elsewhere.
.SH FILES
There is only one file that is important to the program,
which is
.B register.sql
\.
.PP
This file is typically located in the default places specified
in the 
.B ENVIRONMENT
section.
.PP
This file
.B MUST NOT
be renamed.
.SH NOTES
When importing data, things can get confusing, depending on the format.
.PP
To make sure that things go smoothly, here are how a few 
of the formats are read.

.SS JSON
JSON files, which are expected to have the
.B bcheck
extension have the following keys:
.TP
.B id
This is the transaction's id.
.PP
If this is not found, 
an identifier will be automatically generated.
.TP
.B transaction
This houses all other keys pertining to the exchange.
.TP
.B date
The date the exchange took place.
.PP
If this is not found, Today's date will be used.
.PP 
Like when adding transactions, the date
.B must
be in YYYY-MM-DD format.
.TP
.B check_number
The check number associated with the transaction.
.PP
If not found, none will be assgned.
.TP
.B vendor
The vendor/payee in the exchange.
.PP
This value 
.B must 
be present.
.TP
.B memo
A brief description of the exchange.
.TP
.B amount
The amount exchanged.
.PP
Unlike adding transactions manually, 
this must be positive and cannot be left out.
.TP
.B type
The kind of exchange that took place.
.PP
It can only be a
.B deposit
or a
.B withdrawal.
.PP
If this is left out, it is assumed
to be a withdrawal.
.TP
.B is_reconciled
determines if the transaction has been reconciled.
.PP
If this is left out, it is assumed to be false.
.TP
.B category
The category assigned to the transaction.
.SS TSV
TSV columns are parsed as follows in order:
.RS
.IP
id
.IP
date
.IP
check number
.IP
reconciled
.IP
category
.IP
vendor
.IP
memo
.IP
credit
.IP
withdrawal
.RE
.PP
The rules that apply to corresponding keys in
the
.B JSON
section still apply.
.PP
However, is_reconciled
.B must
be either
.B Y
or
.B N
instead of true or false.
.PP
A transaction is only reconciled if value is
.B Y
.PP
transaction type is determined by which field
a value is found.
.SS ODS and XLSX
With the exception of the first line 
being assumed to be headers, 
these follow the same parsing rules as TSV files.
.SS QIF
Only Banking transactions are supported, due to
underlying library.
.SH EXAMPLES
import JSON to registry:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook import -o transactions.bcheck
.RE
.PP
import QIF to registry:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook import -i transactions.qif
.RE
.PP
import Excel file to registry:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook import -i transactions.xlsx
.RE
.PP
import TSV to registry:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook import -i transactions.tsv
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
rcheckbook-add(1),
rcheckbook-export(1)