.TH RCHECKBOOK-EXPORT 1 "20 June 2026" "version 0.5"
.SH NAME
rcheckbook-export \- export registry to file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
rcheckbook export [path/to/database] 
[--date <date> | -d <date>][--check-number <check number>]
[--category <category>]--vendor <vendor>
[--memo <memo> | -m <memo>][--reconciled | -r]
--amount <amount> | -a <amount>
.SH DESCRIPTION
Add an entry to the registry.
.PP
The add subcommand can be used to add an entry 
to the registry with all the data that you know.
.PP
The only required information are the vendor and
the amount exchanged.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -a <amount>, --amount <amount>
The amount exchanged.
.PP
A positive value denotes a deposit, 
while a negative or zero value denotes a withdrawal.
.PP
If a value is not given, it will be put down as zero.
.PP
Because negative values are allowed, 
it is best to provide this date last.
.TP
.B --category <category>
The category to assign to the entry.
.PP
If your category has any spaces, make sure to wrap it up in quotes.
.PP
If no category is named, it will be considered Uncategorized.
.PP
If a specified category is not found, 
it will be added to the registry along with the transaction.
.PP
The default categories are as follows:
.RS
.IP
Dining
.IP
Gifts
.IP
Groceries
.IP
Opening Balance
.IP
Recreation
.IP
Subscriptions
.IP
Utilities
.RE
.PP
Categories are case insensitive.
.PP
However, 
the case used when specifying a new category 
will be the case stored in the database.
.PP
To keep things consistent,
it is best to capitialize things as if they were
a title.
.TP
.B --check-number <check number>
The check number associated with the exchange.
.PP
If not provided, it will just remain empty.
.TP
.B -d <date>, --date <date>
The date the exchange took place.
.PP
When specifying the date, the expected format is
YYYY-MM-DD.

If this is not provided when adding an entry, 
the current date will be used.
.TP
.B -m <memo>, --memo <memo>
A brief description of the exchange.
.PP
If not provided, this will simply be left empty.
.PP
However, it is best to prvide a memo, 
so that you know what it was for.
.TP
.B -r, --reconciled
Mark the transaction as reconciled.
.PP
If left off, the transaction will be considered unreconciled.
.TP
.B --vendor <vendor>
The vendor/payee in the exchange.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
By default, this program generates a database, 
.B when needed
, from schema file with a particular name located 
in a particular directory.
.PP
On Windows, it will look in the following places in order:
.RS
.IP
the executable's directory
.IP
the current directory
.RE
On macOS, Linux, 
and other Unix-like Operating Systems, it will
look in
.B /usr/local/share/rcheckbook
\.
.PP
If the operating system doesn't have these locations,
such as if you were running NixOS, 
or you cannot write to them, 
you can instead tell it look in a specific 
place by setting
.B REGISTRY_SCHEMA_DIR
\.
.PP
When this is set, 
the program will look for the schema file in that directory
before looking elsewhere.
.SH FILES
There is only one file that is important to the program,
which is
.B register.sql
\.
.PP
This file is typically located in the default places specified
in the 
.B ENVIRONMENT
section.
.PP
This file
.B MUST NOT
be renamed.
.SH BUGS
If you use an environment variable when telling
the program the location of your registry database,
which
.B can
be different from the schema file, 
there is a likelihood that you will get an empty database.
.PP
To avoid this, 
use an absolute path, or,
if it will be in your home folder,
.B ~
\.
.SH EXAMPLES
Add entry to registry:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook add --vendor Bill 
-m "reimburse for food" -a -20
.RE
.PP
Add reconciled transaction from Jan. 01, 1970:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook add -d 1970-01-01 --vendor "Sam Hill Credit Union" 
-m "Interest Earned" -r -a 0.02
.RE
.PP
Add transaction paid via check:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook add --check-number 1260 --vendor "Velociraptor Entertainment" 
-m "Pay Day" -r -a 50000
.RE
.PP
Add transaction with Category:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook add --vendor "Fake Street Electronics" -m "Head set"
--category Gifts -a -200
.RE
