.TH RCHECKBOOK-SUMMARY 1 "21 June 2026" "version 0.3"
.SH NAME
rcheckbook-summary \- display a summary of activity.
.SH SYNOPSIS
rcheckbook summary [path/to/database] 
--period <period> | -p <file period>
.SH DESCRIPTION
Summarize activity.
.PP
The summary subcommand can be used to get a summary of what has gone on.
.PP
You get a breakdown of:
.RS
.IP
categories
.IP
total expenses
.IP
total income
.IP
opening balance
.IP
current balance
.IP
amount recnciled
.IP
amount unreconciled
.RE
.PP
By default, it will take everything into account.
.PP
However, if you specify a period of time, 
it will give you a breakdown of everything in that period
until now.
.PP
Like the add command, 
if you do not provide a database path,
the program will attempt to open
.B register.db
from the
.B .checkbook
directory in your home folder.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -p <period>, --period <period>
The timeframe to summarize.

Possible options are as follows:
.RS
.IP
week
.IP
month
.IP
quarter (3 months)
.IP
half-year (6 months)
.IP
all
.RE
.PP
The last item is the default if this is left off.
.PP
When you provide a value, 
the calculations and data will start from the specified
time ago and end at now.
.SH BUGS
If you use an environment variable when telling
the program the location of your registry database,
which
.B can
be different from the schema file, 
there is a likelihood that you will get an empty database.
.PP
To avoid this, 
use an absolute path, or,
if it will be in your home folder,
.B ~
\.
Also, categories are listed as sums.
.PP
If you want to how much you spent in a category
or how much you earned in a category,
it is best to either make separate categories
or you can use any available tools to do the math for you.
.SH EXAMPLES
3-Month Summary:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook summary -p quarter
.RE
.PP
6-Month Summary:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook export -p half-year
.RE
.PP
Summarize everything:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook summary
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
rcheckbook-add(1),
rcheckbook-list(1)