.TH RCHECKBOOK-LIST 1 "21 June 2026" "version 0.5"
.SH NAME
rcheckbook-list \- display registry.
.SH SYNOPSIS
rcheckbook list [path/to/database] 
[--category <category>] [--vendor <vendor> | -v <vendor>]
[--memo <memo> | -m <memo>][--reconciled | -r]
[--not-reconciled][--tansaction-type <type> | -t <type>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The list subcommand can be used to look at the transactions
that took place.
.PP
There are no required options, 
and if none are specifed, everything will be displayed.
.PP
The items will be displayed in accordance with what was ouylined
for
.B TSV
files in the documentation for the import comand,
but with the addition of a balance field at the end.
.PP
If no path to database is given,
the program will try to open a database located in
.B .checkbook
user your home directory named
.B register.db.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --category <category>
Only show the transaction that belong to a given category.
.PP
This is case insensitive.
.PP
To display transactions without a category, pass
.B Uncategorized
, as that is what the program unwraps to when the value is none.
.TP
.B -m <memo>, --memo <memo>
Only show whose memo contains or matches the specified memo.
.PP
If not provided, this will simply be left empty.
.PP
However, it is best to prvide a memo, 
so that you know what it was for.
.TP
.B -r, --reconciled
Mark the transaction as reconciled.
.PP
If left off, the transaction will be considered unreconciled.
.TP
.B --vendor <vendor>
The vendor/payee in the exchange.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
By default, this program generates a database, 
.B when needed
, from schema file with a particular name located 
in a particular directory.
.PP
On Windows, it will look in the following places in order:
.RS
.IP
the executable's directory
.IP
the current directory
.RE
On macOS, Linux, 
and other Unix-like Operating Systems, it will
look in
.B /usr/local/share/rcheckbook
\.
.PP
If the operating system doesn't have these locations,
such as if you were running NixOS, 
or you cannot write to them, 
you can instead tell it look in a specific 
place by setting
.B REGISTRY_SCHEMA_DIR
\.
.PP
When this is set, 
the program will look for the schema file in that directory
before looking elsewhere.
.SH FILES
There is only one file that is important to the program,
which is
.B register.sql
\.
.PP
This file is typically located in the default places specified
in the 
.B ENVIRONMENT
section.
.PP
This file
.B MUST NOT
be renamed.
.SH BUGS
If you use an environment variable when telling
the program the location of your registry database,
which
.B can
be different from the schema file, 
there is a likelihood that you will get an empty database.
.PP
To avoid this, 
use an absolute path, or,
if it will be in your home folder,
.B ~
\.
.SH EXAMPLES
Add entry to registry:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook add --vendor Bill 
-m "reimburse for food" -a -20
.RE
.PP
Add reconciled transaction from Jan. 01, 1970:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook add -d 1970-01-01 --vendor "Sam Hill Credit Union" 
-m "Interest Earned" -r -a 0.02
.RE
.PP
Add transaction paid via check:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook add --check-number 1260 --vendor "Velociraptor Entertainment" 
-m "Pay Day" -r -a 50000
.RE
.PP
Add transaction with Category:
.RS
.IP
recheckbook add --vendor "Fake Street Electronics" -m "Head set"
--category Gifts -a -200
.RE
