.TH RCHECKBOOK-ADD 1 "20 June 2026" "version 0.4.1"
.SH NAME
rcheckbook-add \- Add entry to registry.
.SH SYNOPSIS
rcheckbook add [path/to/database] 
[--date <date> | -d <date>][--check-number <check number>]
[--category <category>]--vendor <vendor>
[--memo <memo> | -m <memo>][--reconciled | -r]
--amount <amount> | -a <amount>
.SH DESCRIPTION
Add an entry to the registry.
.PP
The add subcommand can be used to add an entry 
to the registry with all the data that you know.
.PP
The only required information are the vendor and
the amount exchanged.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -a <amount>, --amount <amount>
The amount exchanged.
.PP
A positive value denotes a deposit, 
while a negative or zero value denotes a withdrawal.
.PP
If a value is not given, it will be put down as zero.
.PP
Because negative values are allowed, 
it is best to provide this date last.
.TP
.B --category <category>
The category to assign to the entry.
.PP
If your category has any spaces, make sure to wrap it up in quotes.
.PP
If no category is named, it will be considered Uncategorized.
.TP
.B --check-number <check number>
The check number associated with the exchange.
.PP
If not provided, it will just remain empty.
.TP
.B -d <date>, --date <date>
The date the exchange took place.
.PP
When specifying the date, the expected format is
YYYY-MM-DD.

If this is not provided when adding an entry, 
the current date will be used.
.TP
.B -m <memo>, --memo <memo>
A brief description of the exchange.
.PP
If not provided, this will simply be left empty.
.PP
However, it is best to prvide a memo, 
so that you know what it was for.
.TP
.B -r, --reconciled
Mark the transaction as reconciled.
.PP
If left off, the transaction will be considered unreconciled.
.TP
.B --vendor <vendor>
The vendor/payee in the exchange.
